Support installing OSSM Console without a Kiali server present ("lite mode") (#1002)
kiali/kiali.io: content/en/docs/OSSMC/navigating-multiple-meshes.md

---
title: "Navigating Multiple Meshes with OSSMC"
linkTitle: "Navigating Multiple Meshes"
description: "Browse and manage Istio and Kiali instances in the OpenShift Console — without requiring a Kiali server connected to the plugin."
weight: 5
---

> OpenShift Service Mesh Console (OSSMC) includes **Istio control planes** and **Kiali instances** pages in the OpenShift Console **Service Mesh** menu. These pages let you browse and inspect every Istio and Kiali CR on the cluster directly from the console — without requiring a Kiali server to be connected to the plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenShift Service Mesh Console (OSSMC) includes **Istios** and **Kialis** pages in the OpenShift Console **Service Mesh** menu. These pages let you browse and inspect every Istio and Kiali CR on the cluster directly from the console — without requiring a Kiali server to be connected to the plugin.
```

This is especially useful when a cluster hosts many mesh instances. Platform teams that operate dozens or hundreds of Istio control planes (and the Kiali instances that observe them) on a cluster can navigate that inventory in one place instead of jumping between CLI commands, individual operator UIs, or separate Kiali routes.

## Why this matters

* **One inventory for the whole cluster** — List every Istio CR and every Kiali CR from the OpenShift Console sidebar.
* **No Kiali server required** — The pages talk to the Kubernetes API. You can install the OSSMC plugin independently of any Kiali Server and still get this multi-mesh navigation.

> * **Works alongside Kiali-powered observability** — When you do connect a Kiali server to the plugin, Overview, Traffic Graph, and the other observability pages appear for that connected instance. **Istio control planes** and **Kiali instances** stay in the menu so you can still manage the full fleet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Works alongside Kiali-powered observability** — When you do connect a Kiali server to the plugin, Overview, Traffic Graph, and the other observability pages appear for that connected instance. **Istios** and **Kialis** stay in the menu so you can still manage the full fleet.
```

## Istio control planes

> The **Istio control planes** page lists every cluster-scoped Istio CR managed by the OSSM/Sail Operator. Open a row to see details for that Istio installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **Istios** page lists every cluster-scoped Istio CR managed by the OSSM/Sail Operator. Open a row to see details for that Istio installation.
```

Use this page when you need a console view of mesh control-plane instances on the cluster — for example, confirming which Istio CRs exist, opening one for more information, or orienting yourself before connecting a related Kiali instance.

## Kiali instances

> The **Kiali instances** page lists every Kiali CR on the cluster. Open a row to see configuration from that Kiali CR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **Kialis** page lists every Kiali CR on the cluster. Open a row to see configuration from that Kiali CR.
```

{{% alert color="warning" %}}
Both pages only list CRs your OpenShift user has permission to read. If your account has namespace-scoped access instead of cluster-wide access to `istios.sailoperator.io` or `kialis.kiali.io`, the list may show fewer instances than actually exist on the cluster — or appear empty. If you expect to see an instance that is missing, ask your cluster administrator to grant `list`/`get` permission on the relevant CR in that namespace (or cluster-wide).
{{% /alert %}}

The list includes:

* **Connected** — Shows **Active** when that Kiali instance is the OSSMC backend, or **Inactive** when it is not. If OSSMConsole resources cannot be read, the status shows **Unknown**.
* **Observe** — When route hosts are available, links to the Kiali UI and the OpenShift Console (**Kiali** | **Console**).

> * **Actions** — **Connect** or **Disconnect** to change which Kiali server OSSMC uses.

Reviewer: In the demo I saw these were not the options. It was something like, "Promote". Don't worry about it for now because it's probably obvious to the user, and we may want to rename these options again (because I think it can be more clear/simple).

Author: Promote and Demote was old verbiage - others reviewed this and asked I change them to be more understandable.. "Connect" and "Disconnect" we use now.

From the list or detail page you can **Connect** or **Disconnect** a Kiali instance:

* **Connect** — Connects that Kiali server to the OSSMC plugin so Overview, Traffic Graph, Mesh, and the other Kiali-powered pages become available for that instance.

> * **Disconnect** — Disconnects that Kiali instance from the plugin. **Istio control planes** and **Kiali instances** remain available so you can keep navigating the fleet and connect a different instance when needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Disconnect** — Disconnects that Kiali instance from the plugin. **Istios** and **Kialis** remain available so you can keep navigating the fleet and connect a different instance when needed.
```

Connect and disconnect require permission to patch the OSSMConsole CR (`ossmconsoles.kiali.io`).

{{% alert color="info" %}}

> OSSMC [supports a single tenant at a time](https://github.com/kiali/openshift-servicemesh-plugin/issues/187) for Kiali-powered observability pages. Connect the Kiali instance you want to use for deep observability; use **Istio control planes** and **Kiali instances** to navigate the rest of the fleet and switch when needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OSSMC [supports a single tenant at a time](https://github.com/kiali/openshift-servicemesh-plugin/issues/187) for Kiali-powered observability pages. Connect the Kiali instance you want to use for deep observability; use **Istios** and **Kialis** to navigate the rest of the fleet and switch when needed.
```

{{% /alert %}}

## When a Kiali server is connected — and when it is not

What you see in the Service Mesh menu depends on whether OSSMC has a connected, reachable Kiali server:

> * **When no Kiali server is connected** — Expect **Istio control planes** and **Kiali instances** only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **When no Kiali server is connected** — Expect **Istios** and **Kialis** only.
```

> * **When a Kiali instance is connected and reachable** — Expect observability pages (Overview, Traffic Graph, Mesh, and others) in the menu, with **Istio control planes** and **Kiali instances** at the bottom, below a separator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **When a Kiali instance is connected and reachable** — Expect observability pages (Overview, Traffic Graph, Mesh, and others) in the menu, with **Istios** and **Kialis** at the bottom, below a separator.
```

> If OSSMC is configured to use a Kiali server but cannot reach it, observability pages show a **Service Mesh is not configured** message. **Istio control planes** and **Kiali instances** continue to work — the same as when no server is connected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If OSSMC is configured to use a Kiali server but cannot reach it, observability pages show a **Service Mesh is not configured** message. **Istios** and **Kialis** continue to work — the same as when no server is connected.
```

## Getting started

1. Install the Kiali Operator (a Kiali server is optional for these pages).
2. Create an OSSMConsole CR to install the plugin — see [The OSSMConsole CR](/docs/installation/installation-guide/creating-updating-ossmconsole-cr/).

> 3. Open **Service Mesh** → **Istio control planes** or **Kiali instances** in the OpenShift Console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Open **Service Mesh** → **Istios** or **Kialis** in the OpenShift Console.
```

> To connect a Kiali server for deep observability on one instance, use **Connect** on the **Kiali instances** page or set `spec.kiali` on the OSSMConsole CR. See [Connecting a Kiali instance to the console](/docs/installation/installation-guide/creating-updating-ossmconsole-cr/#connecting-a-kiali-instance-to-the-console).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To connect a Kiali server for deep observability on one instance, use **Connect** on the **Kialis** page or set `spec.kiali` on the OSSMConsole CR. See [Connecting a Kiali instance to the console](/docs/installation/installation-guide/creating-updating-ossmconsole-cr/#connecting-a-kiali-instance-to-the-console).
```
